40. Risks to the program. Maintaining all IMF disbursements through a BIS-monitored account and requiring external reviews of program monetary data at test dates (including spending under emergency procedure) remain necessary mitigation measures under the current program. 

41. Financing assurances. The ECF arrangement is fully financed for the next 12 months (Table 2), with good prospects for the remainder of the program (Table 7). The program is expected to catalyze additional support from both multilateral and bilateral partners. Notably, the World Bank has approved a new Development Policy Operation (DPO), with projected disbursements of $\cup \mathsf { S$ 60 0 }$ million in 2025—against $\cup \mathsf { S$ 500 }$ million initially anticipated at program approval. In addition to the DPO, the World Bank is also expected to provide further support through various ongoing programs, including budget support grants and loans for education sector wages (PERSE) and for provincial governments (ENCORE PBC#4). France has also contributed additional budget support in 2025, provided in the form of grants for $\yen 15$ million. Over the course of the program, exceptional financing from sources other than the ECF arrangement is projected to cover, on average, close to 50 percent of the external financing gap, with that share decreasing to 42 percent in 2027. 

42. Arrears. The DRC owes pre-HIPC Initiative arrears to Angola $\mathrm { U S } \$ 23.5$ million), Taiwan Province of China $\mathrm { \ U S } \$ 31.6$ million), Namibia $\mathrm { U S } \$ 3.5$ million), and Rwanda $\mathrm { \ U S } \$ 1.3$ million), with whom negotiations or reconciliation processes remain ongoing. Letters have been exchanged with some of these creditors earlier in 2025, and meetings are in the process of being scheduled, with enhanced information sharing to help facilitate agreement. These continue to be deemed away under the policy on arrears to official bilateral creditors, as the underlying Paris Club Agreed Minute is adequately representative and the authorities have made best efforts to resolve the arrears. The DRC’s central government also holds arrears to some external commercial creditors $( \mathsf { U S } \$ 97.4$ million), with whom it is making good faith efforts to reach a collaborative agreement, notably through recent letter exchanges, provision of additional information, and communication to facilitate resolution. 

43. Capacity to repay. The DRC’s capacity to repay the Fund remains adequate, although subject to risks (Table 6). IMF credit is projected to peak at 4.9 percent of GDP and 40.2 percent of reserves in 2027, with annual repayments staying below 0.4 percent of GDP and 1.1 percent of exports. Risks stem from weaker exports and the high share of Fund credit in external debt, but reserve accumulation, reform implementation, and low public debt support its repayment capacity. 

STAFF APPRAISAL 

44. Growth remains robust and inflation and exchange rate are stabilizing. Growth in the extractive sector, concentrated in the South, remains relatively shielded from the conflict in the East. 

Prospects for the sector in 2025 remain positive, mainly due to the strong expansion of zinc production. The impact in the non-extractive sector has remained limited to specific sectors, such as non-subsistence agriculture and banking, and has been compensated by stronger growth in construction, transportation and telecommunications. Positive developments in inflation and exchange rate have proved resilient to the conflict and the uncertain international context and should benefit from the continuation of the BCC’s tight monetary policy. In the medium term, a rebalancing of growth is expected, with slower growth in extractive sector being compensated by faster growth in the non-extractive sector, contributing to the diversification of the economy. 

45. Program performance is mixed. At end-December 2024, the authorities met all but two quantitative performance criteria (QPCs) and most indicative targets (ITs). They request waivers for the missed QPCs on the domestic fiscal balance and the BCC FX assets in the domestic banks. The request is supported by corrective actions (MEFP ¶4). They also request a modification of three endJune 2025 QPC reflecting the updated macroeconomic projections discussed above—specifically, the QPCs on the domestic fiscal balance, net credit to the government from the BCC, and the BCC’s net domestic assets. 

46. The authorities need to implement strong offsetting measures to close the fiscal gap arising from the conflict-related and other recent policy measures. As outlined in their revised budget for 2025, this will require renewed effort on revenue mobilization and a significant reduction in the cost of operating the government. These actions will be particularly important to safeguard public investment from undue cuts—a key policy objective of the authorities. Proactive contingency planning will also be critical to ensure the continuity of public services should the conflict persist, or new shocks emerge. To create lasting fiscal space for additional public investment and social spending over the medium term, the authorities should prioritize revenue mobilization, particularly from the mining sector, and further rationalize recurrent spending. PFM reforms on the expenditure chain will be key to improve transparency and accountability and ultimately curtail unproductive spending. A resource-based fiscal framework will help insulate essential budget spending from commodity price volatility. 

47. While inflationary pressures continue to moderate, the BCC should maintain its current monetary policy stance until inflation reaches its target. This window of relative stability is an opportunity for the BCC to strengthen its operational framework and advance the safeguards agenda. The BCC should closely monitor emerging financial vulnerabilities stemming from the ongoing conflict in the East, standing ready to alleviate liquidity risk and, if necessary, extend temporary measures for relaxed loan provisioning. 

48. Staff supports the authorities’ requests for waivers for the missed QPCs, the modification of three QPCs, the completion of the first review under the ECF-arrangement and the financing assurances review. A strong commitment to improve the composition of public spending and to tighten policies to contain the public deficit and curb inflation, together with structural reforms while building capacity, will support the authorities in meeting program objectives. 

Proposed Decision 

The following decision, which may be adopted by a majority of the votes cast, is proposed for adoption by the Executive Board. 

1. The Democratic Republic of the Congo has consulted with the Fund in accordance with paragraph 4(b) of the arrangement for the Democratic Republic of the Congo under the Extended Credit Facility (EBS/24/157, 12/23/2024) (the “ECF Arrangement”) to review program implementation and to reach understandings regarding the conditions for further disbursements. 

2. The letter dated June 18, 2025 from the Prime Minister, the Governor of the Banque Centrale du Congo $( " \mathsf { B C C } ^ { \prime \prime } )$ , the Minister of Finance and the Minister of State, Minister of the Budget of the Democratic Republic of the Congo (the “June 2025 Letter”), together with its attached Memorandum of Economic and Financial Policies (the “June 2025 MEFP”) and Technical Memorandum of Understanding (the “June 2025 TMU”), shall be attached to the ECF Arrangement, and the letter dated December 20, 2024 from the Prime Minister, the Governor of the BCC, the Minister of Finance and the Minister of State and of the Budget of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, together with all of its attachments, shall be read as supplemented and modified by the June 2025 Letter and its attachments. 

3. Accordingly, the ECF Arrangement shall be amended as follows: 

a. A new paragraph 2(d) shall be included in the ECF Arrangement to read as follows: 

“2(d) The fourth disbursement, in an amount equivalent to SDR 190.4 million, will be available on or after May 15, 2026, at the request of the Democratic Republic of the Congo and subject to paragraphs 4.B and 5 below.” 

b. The reference in paragraph 4(a) of the ECF Arrangement to “Table 1 of the MEFP, and as further specified in the TMU” shall be replaced with “Table 1 of the June 2025 MEFP, and as further specified in the June 2025 TMU”. 

c. Paragraph 4 of the ECF Arrangement shall be renumbered as 4.A., and a new paragraph 4.B. shall be inserted to the ECF Arrangement to read as follows: 

$" 4 . 8$ . The Democratic Republic of the Congo will not request the fourth disbursement under this arrangement specified in paragraph 2(d) above: 

(a) if the Managing Director of the Trustee finds that with respect to the fourth disbursement the data as of December 31, 2025, indicate that the performance criterion on: 

(i) the floor on the changes in net international reserves of the BCC; or (ii) the ceiling on changes in net BCC credit to central government; or (iii) the ceiling on the changes in net domestic assets of the BCC; or (iv) the floor on the domestic fiscal balance (cash basis); 

as set out in Table 1 of the June 2025 MEFP, and as further specified in the June 2025 TMU, is not observed; or 

(b) until the Trustee has determined that, with respect to the fourth disbursement, the third program review, referred to in the June 2025 MEFP, has been completed.” 

d. The reference in paragraph 5(a) of the ECF Arrangement to “Table 1 of the MEFP, and as further specified in the TMU” shall be replaced with “Table 1 of the June 2025 MEFP, and as further specified in the June 2025 TMU.” 

4. The Fund decides that the first program review referred to in paragraph 4(b) of the ECF Arrangement and the financing assurances review referred to in paragraph 5(c) of the ECF Arrangement are completed, and that the Democratic Republic of the Congo may request the second disbursement referred to in paragraph 2(b) of the ECF Arrangement, notwithstanding the nonobservance of the performance criteria on (1) the floor on the domestic fiscal balance (cash basis), referred to in paragraph 4.A.(a)(iv) of the ECF Arrangement, at end-December 2024; and (2) the continuous ceiling on the levels of foreign currency assets of the BCC held with domestic correspondents, referred to in paragraph 5(a)(ii) of the ECF Arrangement, on the condition that the information provided by the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the performance under these criteria is accurate, and on the further condition that the information provided by the Democratic Republic of the Congo on the implementation of the measure specified as prior action for the first review set forth in Table 2 of the June 2025 MEFP is accurate. 

The extractive sector continues to drive GDP growth, despite slowdown...… 

Contribution to Real GDP Growth (Percent) 

Non-extractive growth slowed down driven by a deceleration in construction… 

Headline and core inflation continue to moderate… 

…with increasing copper and cobalt mining exports (until the ban on cobalt exports) despite weaker metal prices. 

Cobalt and Copper Exports 

(Thousand metric ton, 12-month rolling Avg.) 

Consumption vs Investment (Percent of GDP) 

…as the exchange rate remains stable despite the volatility regarding the security situation. 

The current account deficit has narrowed due to higher level of exports… 

Current Account Balance 

External debt remains relatively low… 

…and has been financed largely by FDI, followed by other investment flows, 

The fiscal deficit has remained broadly contained … 

Fiscal Balance 

…though stronger revenues have not compensated… 

…for the increase in current and exceptional expenditures partly due to security spending with the Eastern conflict. 

Domestic financing has picked up in recent years with the authorities’ efforts to deepen the domestic market… 

NCG continues to improve following the signature of the MoU regularizing outstanding credit of the BCC to the government in 2021 . 

Sources: Congolese authorities; and IMF staff estimates. 1/ Exceptional expenditure includes security, elections, and other exceptional expenditures. 2/ The increase in NCG observed in the late part of 2021 onward is driven by the part of the SDR allocation retroceded to the government as budgetary support. 

Figure 4. Monetary and Financial Sector Developments, 2019-24 

Credit to the economy is increasing, albeit from a low base…. 

Credit is extended mostly in FX, while credit in Congolese francs remains limited. 

Capital ratios remain above requirements. 

…with most credit allocated to private enterprises. 

Bank Credit to the Non-Financial Sector (By sector, in percent of total, as of March-24) 

Bank deposits are almost entirely in foreign currency. 

After a peak following the reinstatement of credit quality rules, NPLs are declining. 
